add draft of packaging existing software tutorial (#650)
NixOS/nix.dev: source/tutorials/packaging-existing-software.md

---
myst:
  html_meta:
    "description lang=en": "Packaging Existing Software With Nix"
    "keywords": "Nix, packaging"
---

(packaging-existing-software)=

# Packaging Existing Software With Nix

One of Nix's primary use-cases is in addressing common difficulties encountered while packaging software, like *managing dependencies*.

> In the long term, Nix helps tremendously in alleviating that stress, but when *first* (re)packaging existing software with Nix, it's common to encounter missing dependencies preventing builds from succeeding.

Reviewer: Good expectation management. Some thoughts
- Flaws also include downloading from the internet
- Discovering dependencies by letting the build fail may be a good practice. We don't want to add unused dependencies.

> If you haven't already read the tutorial on making a derivation, please go do so before reading this!

Reviewer 2: Should have a link to this tutorial

Author: Removed reference to this

> In this tutorial, we'll see how to create Nix derivations to package C/C++ software, taking advantage of the [`nixpkgs` `stdenv`](https://nixos.org/manual/nixpkgs/stable/#chap-stdenv) which automates much of the work of building self-contained C/C++ packages.

Author: It's not *specific* to C/C++, but that's all we package here

> We'll begin by considering `hello`, a feature-complete implementation of the famous "hello world", which requires no external dependencies.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We'll begin by considering `hello`, a feature-complete implementation of the famous "hello world", which requires no dependencies besides what's already in `stdenv`.
```

Then we'll move to progressively more complex packages with their own separate dependencies, leading us to use additional derivation features.

Along the way, we'll encounter and address Nix error messages, build failures, and a host of other issues, developing our iterative debugging techniques as we go.

## Packages in Nix
Before we proceed, an important point of clarification: we conventionally use the term "package" by analogy to other systems, although this term is not a proper concept in Nix.

> For the purposes of this tutorial, by "package" we mean "a Nix function which takes an attribute set of 'dependencies' and produces a derivation", where "dependencies" could be other packages or configuration parameters.

Reviewer 2: This is a bit confusing, usually derivations themselves are understood as packages, not the functions producing them.

Author: Clarified this

> For the purposes of this tutorial, by "package" we mean "a Nix function which takes an attribute set of 'dependencies' and produces a derivation", where "dependencies" could be other packages or configuration parameters.

Reviewer: I prefer to define it in terms of the value returned from the function.
You may well define a package without defining any functions:
```nix
with import <nixpkgs> {};
stdenv.mkDerivation {}
```

Reviewer: (but don't do that)

Author: > I prefer to define it in terms of the value returned from the function.

I changed it to this; thanks

Up to that point, the `stdenv` automatically determined the `buildPhase` information for our `icat` package.

During derivation realisation, there are a number of shell functions ("hooks", in `nixpkgs`) which may execute in each derivation phase, which do things like set variables, source files, create directories, and so on. These are specific to each phase, and run both before and after that phase's execution, controlling the build environment and helping to prevent environment-modifying behavior defined within packages from creating sources of nondeterminism within and between Nix derivations.

It's good practice when packaging software with Nix to include calls to these hooks in the derivation phases you define, even when you don't make direct use of them; this facilitates easy [overriding](https://nixos.org/manual/nixpkgs/stable/#chap-overrides) of specific parts of the derivation later, in addition to the previously-mentioned reproducibility benefits.

We should now adjust our `installPhase` to call the appropriate hooks:

```nix
# icat.nix
...

>   installPhase = ''
>     runHook preInstall
>     mkdir -p $out/bin
>     cp icat $out/bin
> 	runHook postInstall
>   '';

Author: ```suggestion
  installPhase = ''
    runHook preInstall
    mkdir -p $out/bin
    cp icat $out/bin
	  runHook postInstall
  '';
```

  nativeBuildInputs = with pkgs; [ pkg-config ];
  buildInputs = with pkgs; [ imlib2 xorg.libX11.dev ];
}
```

### Debugging with a Development Shell
This solves some of the errors we just saw, but not all; the `ld` error produced by all the undefined references is gone, but we still see a non-zero `make` return value: `make: *** No rule to make target 'install'`.

Nix is automatically working with the `Makefile` that comes with `icat`, which indeed lacks an `install` target. The `README` in the `icat` repository only mentions using `make` to build the tool, presumably leaving installation up to us. We've now discovered one limit to what Nix can do for us automatically: it doesn't read minds. Fortunately, it does still make the fix quite straightforward to implement.

If you haven't read the tutorials on creating [ad-hoc](https://nix.dev/tutorials/first-steps/dev-environment) or [declarative](https://nix.dev/tutorials/first-steps/declarative-and-reproducible-developer-environments) development environments, do that now before proceeding through the rest of this tutorial; dropping into a `nix-shell` is a crucial component in the Nix user toolbox, and indispensible for debugging.

> To enter a useful development shell, we'll pass the dependencies from `nativeBuildInputs` and `buildInputs` to `nix-shell -p`. We'll also make sure to include `git`, so we can clone the `icat` GitHub repository:

Reviewer 3: We can also just replace `nix-build` by `nix-shell`, which will avoid any manual steps. Then `$src` will be the source directory, and we can copy stuff out of it when needed.

```console
[nix-shell:~/icat]$ make
gcc -c -Wall -pedantic -std=c99 -D_DEFAULT_SOURCE `pkg-config --cflags imlib2` -o icat.o icat.c
icat.c: In function ‘main’:
icat.c:319:33: warning: ignoring return value of ‘write’ declared with attribute ‘warn_unused_result’ [-Wunused-result]
  319 |                                 write(tempfile, &buf, 1);
      |                                 ^~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
gcc -o icat icat.o  `pkg-config --libs imlib2`
```

However, this does not prevent the binary from being produced; an `icat` executable is now present in the local directory, and it's up to us to decide what to do with it.

### installPhase
In order to make packages available for other packages to depend on, Nix copies everything to the Nix store (at `/nix/store`), and symlinks them from there into build contexts and development environments.

The `Makefile` doesn't provide an installation step, so we must produce one for our derivation, using the [`installPhase` attribute](https://nixos.org/manual/nixpkgs/stable/#ssec-install-phase), which contains a list of command strings to execute to accomplish the installation.

> The `icat` executable is only used at runtime, and isn't a compile-time input for anything else at this point, so we only need to concern ourselves with the `bin` output. In Nix, the result of a build is copied to a location stored in the `$out` variable accessible in the derivation's component scripts; we'll create a `bin` directory within that, and then copy our `icat` executable there:

Reviewer 3: Don't hint at things that are not relevant yet. Just say we have to copy the build results to the output path and show how to do it.

```nix
# icat.nix
{ pkgs
, lib
, stdenv
}:

stdenv.mkDerivation {
  name = "icat";
  src = pkgs.fetchFromGitHub {
    owner = "atextor";
    repo = "icat";
    rev = "master";
    sha256 = "sha256-b/2mRzCTyGkz2I1U+leUhspvW77VcHN7Awp+BVdVNRM=";
  };

  nativeBuildInputs = with pkgs; [ pkg-config ];
  buildInputs = with pkgs; [ imlib2 xorg.libX11.dev ];

  installPhase = ''
    mkdir -p $out/bin
    cp icat $out/bin
  '';
}
```

After running our `nix-build` command one last time, we can `ls` in the local directory to find a `result` symlink to the Nix store, with `result/bin/icat` the executable we built. Success!

> ## Contributing our Work

Reviewer 3: A tutorial on making good contributions to Nixpkgs is a high value target, but it would open a real can of worms here. Especially we'd have to clarify what should go into the manual (and how to structure it there) and what should be part of a step-by-step tutorial. The other thing are the million little details that we'd have to get right to make sure this procedure will in fact lead to success. That should absolutely involve Nixpkgs maintainers. I already see a handful of things that won't pass review, but let's not get into that and instead split that part out for now and focus on polishing the tutorial to get as close to what's needed as possible, avoiding additional steps later (e.g. not grab the HEAD of master by default).
